feat(ai): add structured outputs (#3713)
scaleway/docs-content: ai-data/generative-apis/how-to/use-structured-outputs.mdx

---
meta:
  title:  How to use structured outputs
  description: Learn how to interact with structured outputs using Scaleway's Chat Completions API service.
content:
  h1:  How to use structured outputs
  paragraph: Learn how to interact with powerful text models using Scaleway's Chat Completions API service.
tags: chat-completitions-api
dates:
  validation: 2024-09-17
  posted: 2024-09-17
---

Structured outputs allow users to get consistent, machine-readable (JSON format) responses from language models (LLMs).
By specifying a response format when using the [Chat Completions API](/ai-data/generative-apis/api-cli/using-chat-api/), you can ensure that responses are returned in a predefined JSON structure.
There are two main modes for generating structured outputs: **Object Mode** (schemaless) and **Schema Mode** (deterministic, structured output).

> You can interact with text models using several ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can interact with text models in several ways:
```

- The Scaleway [console](https://console.scaleway.com) will soon provide a complete [playground](/ai-data/generative-apis/how-to/query-text-models/#accessing-the-playground), aiming to test models, adapt parameters, and observe how these changes affect the output in real-time.
- Via the [Chat API](/ai-data/generative-apis/how-to/query-text-models/#querying-text-models-via-api)

<Macro id="requirements" />

> - Access to this service is restricted while in beta. You can request access to the product by filling out a form on the Scaleway's [betas page](https://www.scaleway.com/en/betas/#generative-api).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access to Generative APIs. While in beta, the service is restricted to invited users. You can request access by filling out a form on the Scaleway's [Betas page](https://www.scaleway.com/en/betas/#generative-api).
```

- A Scaleway account logged into the [console](https://console.scaleway.com)
- [Owner](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#owner) status or [IAM permissions](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#permission) allowing you to perform actions in the intended Organization
- A valid [API key](/identity-and-access-management/iam/how-to/create-api-keys/) for API authentication
- Python 3.7+ installed on your system

## Types of structured outputs

- **JSON mode** (schemaless):
   - Type: `{"type": "json_object"}`
   - This mode is non-deterministic and allows the model to output a JSON object without strict validation.
   - Useful for flexible outputs when you expect the model to infer a reasonable structure based on your prompt.
   - JSON Mode is older and has been used by developers since early API implementations.

- **Structured outputs (schema mode)** (deterministic/structured):
   - Type `{"type": "json_schema"}`
   - This mode enforces a strict schema format, where the output adheres to the predefined structure.
   - Supports complex types and validation mechanisms as per the JSON schema specification (e.g., `anyOf`, `oneOf`, `allOf`).

>    - Structured outputs is newer and has been implemented by OpenAI in September 2023 to enable stricter, schema-based response formatting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Structured outputs is a newer feature implemented by OpenAI in September 2023 to enable stricter, schema-based response formatting.
```

<Message type="note">

>     - All LLMs on the Scaleway library support **JSON mode** and **Structured outputs**, however, quality of results will vary in the schemaless JSON mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - All LLMs on the Scaleway library support **JSON mode** and **Structured outputs**, however, the quality of results will vary in the schemaless JSON mode.
```

>     - JSON mode: It is important to explicitly ask the model to generate JSON output either in system prompt or user prompt. To prevent infinite generations, you are encouraged to ask the model for short JSON objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - JSON mode: It is important to explicitly ask the model to generate a JSON output either in system prompt or user prompt. To prevent infinite generations, you are encouraged to ask the model for short JSON objects.
```

    - Structured outputs: Scaleway supports the [JSON schema specification](https://json-schema.org/specification/) including nested schemas composition (`anyOf`, `allOf`, `oneOf` etc), `$ref`, `all` types, and regular expressions.

> </Lessage>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
</Message>
```

    "emails to see if there's anything urgent."
)
```

### Using JSON mode (schemaless)

In JSON mode, you can prompt the model to output a JSON object without enforcing a strict schema.

```python
def schemaless():
    print(">>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> JSON MODE=JSON object only \n")
    extract = client.chat.completions.create(
        messages=[
            {
                "role": "system",
                "content": "The following is a voice message transcript. Only answer in JSON.",
            },
            {
                "role": "user",
                "content": TRANSCRIPT,
            },
        ],
        model=MODEL,
        response_format={
            "type": "json_object",
        },
    )
    output = json.loads(extract.choices[0].message.content)
    print(json.dumps(output, indent=2))
    return output
```

Output example:
```json
{
  "Current Time": "7:00 AM",
  "Plan": {
    "Breakfast": {
      "Choices": "scrambled eggs and toast",
      "Additional Drink": "cup of coffee"
    },
    "Task": "Check emails for urgent matters"
  }
}
```

### Using structured outputs with JSON schema (Pydantic)

> Bu using [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/concepts/models/), users can define the schema as a Python class and enforce the model to return results adhering to this schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/concepts/models/), users can define the schema as a Python class and enforce the model to return results adhering to this schema.
```

---
meta:
  title:  How to use structured outputs
  description: Learn how to interact with structured outputs using Scaleway's Chat Completions API service.
content:
  h1:  How to use structured outputs
  paragraph: Learn how to interact with powerful text models using Scaleway's Chat Completions API service.
tags: chat-completitions-api
dates:
  validation: 2024-09-17
  posted: 2024-09-17
---

Structured outputs allow users to get consistent, machine-readable JSON format responses from language models.
JSON, as a widely-used format, enables seamless integration with a variety of platforms and applications. Its interoperability is crucial for developers aiming to incorporate AI functionality into their current systems with minimal adjustments.

By specifying a response format when using the [Chat Completions API](/ai-data/generative-apis/api-cli/using-chat-api/), you can ensure that responses are returned in a JSON structure.
There are two main modes for generating JSON: **Object Mode** (schemaless) and **Schema Mode** (deterministic, structured output).

You can interact with text models in several ways:

> - The Scaleway [console](https://console.scaleway.com) will soon provide a complete [playground](/ai-data/generative-apis/how-to/query-text-models/#accessing-the-playground), aiming to test models, adapt parameters, and observe how these changes affect the output in real-time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Via the Scaleway [console](https://console.scaleway.com), which will soon provide a complete [playground](/ai-data/generative-apis/how-to/query-text-models/#accessing-the-playground), aiming to test models, adapt parameters, and observe how these changes affect the output in real-time.
```

- Via the [Chat API](/ai-data/generative-apis/how-to/query-text-models/#querying-text-models-via-api)

<Macro id="requirements" />

- Access to Generative APIs.

>     While in beta, the service is restricted to invited users. You can request access by filling out a form on the Scaleway's [Betas page](https://www.scaleway.com/en/betas/#generative-api).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    While in beta, the service is restricted to invited users. You can request access by filling out a form on Scaleway's [Betas page](https://www.scaleway.com/en/betas/#generative-api).
```

>     While in beta, the service is restricted to invited users. You can request access by filling out a form on the Scaleway's [Betas page](https://www.scaleway.com/en/betas/#generative-apis).

Author: ```suggestion
    While in beta, the service is restricted to invited users. You can request access by filling out a form on Scaleway's [Betas page](https://www.scaleway.com/en/betas/#generative-apis).
```

- A Scaleway account logged into the [console](https://console.scaleway.com)
- [Owner](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#owner) status or [IAM permissions](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#permission) allowing you to perform actions in the intended Organization
- A valid [API key](/identity-and-access-management/iam/how-to/create-api-keys/) for API authentication
- Python 3.7+ installed on your system

## Types of structured outputs

- **JSON mode** (schemaless):
   - Type: `{"type": "json_object"}`
   - This mode is non-deterministic and allows the model to output a JSON object without strict validation.
   - Useful for flexible outputs when you expect the model to infer a reasonable structure based on your prompt.

>    - JSON Mode is older and has been used by developers since early API implementations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - JSON mode is older and has been used by developers since early API implementations.
```

   - Structured outputs is a newer feature implemented by OpenAI in 2024 to enable stricter, schema-based response formatting.

<Message type="note">
    - All LLMs on the Scaleway library support **JSON mode** and **Structured outputs**, however, the quality of results will vary in the schemaless JSON mode.
    - JSON mode: It is important to explicitly ask the model to generate a JSON output either in system prompt or user prompt. To prevent infinite generations, model providers most often encourage to ask the model for short JSON objects.
    - Structured outputs: Scaleway supports the [JSON schema specification](https://json-schema.org/specification/) including nested schemas composition (`anyOf`, `allOf`, `oneOf` etc), `$ref`, `all` types, and regular expressions.
</Message>

## Code examples

<Message type="tip">
    Before diving into the code examples, ensure you have the necessary libraries installed:
    ```bash
    pip install openai pydantic
    ```
</Message>

The following Python examples demonstrate how to use both **JSON mode** and **Structured outputs** to generate structured responses.

We will send to our LLM a voice note transcript in order to structure it.

> Following is our base code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below is our base code:
```

        },
        {
            "role": "user",
            "content": TRANSCRIPT,
        },
    ],
    model=MODEL,
    response_format={
        "type": "json_schema",
        "json_schema": {
            "schema": {
                "type": "object",
                "properties": {
                    "title": {"type": "string"},
                    "summary": {"type": "string"},
                    "actionItems": {
                        "type": "array",
                        "items": {"type": "string"}
                    }
                },
                "required": ["title", "summary", "actionItems"]
            }
        }
    }
)
output = json.loads(extract.choices[0].message.content)
print(json.dumps(output, indent=2))
```

Output example:
```json
{
  "title": "Evening Routine",
  "actionItems": [
    "Water the plants",
    "Cook dinner (pasta and garlic bread)",
    "Make phone calls"
  ],
  "summary": "Made a list of tasks to accomplish before relaxing tonight"
}
```

## Conclusion

Using structured outputs with LLMs can significantly enhance data handling in your applications.

> By choosing between JSON Mode and Structured Outputs with JSON Schema, you control the consistency and structure of the model's responses to suit your specific needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By choosing between JSON mode and Structured outputs with JSON schema, you control the consistency and structure of the model's responses to suit your specific needs.
```
